Sir Daudi Chwa liked Nsibirwa so much that he let Nsibirwa govern as 
Katikkiro until the end of his reign in 1939. He gave Nsibirwa two princes, 
George William Kimbugwe and Henry Kimera, to raise in his home. Nsibirwa 
organized the weddings of four princesses at Butikiro and these weddings 
brought great joy to everyone at the Butikiro Homestead. Later Sir Daudi 
Chwa bestowed him the highest honor: Master of Shield and Spear
Nsibirwa saw it as his duty to help guide Mutesa as Kabaka and often took 
him on tours through Buganda. In his book, Muteesa described Nsibirwa as a 
respected elder and a knowledgeable man who could discern the right thing 
and execute it with dispatch.

Nsibirwa is also remembered for his great mobilisation skills. During the 
Second World War, he mobilised educated Baganda youth, including three of 
his sons and three relatives, to fi ght in Ethiopia, Libya and Burma.
He won honours from the British Government and Kabaka Daudi Chwa II. 
The Britons conferred upon him the honour of being a Member of the British 
Empire for his outstanding performance in leadership. He campaigned for 
immunisation against small pox and ensured food security and peace in 
the kingdom. Nsibirwa is also credited for building the Twekobe in Bulange, 
Mengo

Some of the key events during his time as Katikkiro included:
The rise of educated young men. Between 1920 and 1940, a lot of young 
men passed through the formal education system and obtained jobs in the 
Buganda government and the Protectorate government. Administration 
more and more became an activity for the educated young men and not for 
their elders but Chwa refused to let Nsibirwa resign as Katikkiro (despite the 
fact that Nsibirwa was not formally educated).
The Namasole affair. After Chwa’s death, the mother of his heir, the 
Namasole, wished to marry Simon Kigozi. The chiefs and the young men 
opposed the marriage on the ground that custom prohibited the queen 
mother from marrying again. Nsibirwa and Hamu Mukasa disagreed, arguing 
that custom could be changed in the presence of a powerful reason and they 
viewed a happy marriage as such a reason. Nsibirwa and Hamu Mukasa the 
permitted Namasole to marry. As a consequence, some agitated members 
of the Buganda Lukikko forced Nsibirwa to resign in 1941 and the Namasole 
evicted from the Lubiri. Nsibirwa’s enemies thereafter prohibited him from 
attending royal functions but he defied them and attended.