Family and Legacy


In 1925, he returned to Bugerere and continued his efforts to improve the 
agricultural practices of the residents. He used a bicycle in his tours of the 
county. The part of the county in which he was born, Bulondoganyi, had long 
been emptied of it’s population due to a sleeping sickness epidemic. He 
never revisited for many years but rather chose to make a home in Kyaggwe, 
in an area known as Namakomo which is the family and ancestral home till 
this day

He once hunted and captured a lion that was terrorizing the people of the 
area. He said that if he didn’t kill the lion he would be a coward in front of the 
mission of serving Kabaka and protecting the people.
In 1927, after the death of Sir Apollo Kaggwa, he returned to Ssingo as 
Mukwenda. He toured the county by bicycle and other times by lorry. In his 
time as Mukwenda, he made many friends and among them was Kajongolo 
Kamya, then one of the leading men in Ssingo (father of Bulandira Bagenda, 
Dr. Latima Musoke, George Kalanzi, one Masembe who was the chief overseer 
of the palace during the time of Sir Edward Muteesa as well as the father of 
Mrs. Joyce Mpanga, who served as minister of education in the 1980s). 
He held meetings to sub-county chiefs would come routinely to bring 
information regarding administration from all the 20 counties. He travelled 
around the counties to ensure the roads were maintained.

Katikkiro of Buganda

Tax matters were examined carefully because when Nsibirwa uncovered a 
tax deficiency, he told the chiefs to own the loss and he then thought of 
how to fill the gap and once it was covered, he then turned to recovering the 
lost funds from them. It was a dishonor in those days for a chief to have a tax 
deficiency: 
In 1928, Nsibirwa became the treasurer (Omuwanika) of the kingdom. 
His offices were in the building that later bercame the seat location of the 
Juvenile Court (later to become the site of Nabagereka Primary School). In 
his inaugural speech before the Kabaka, he said that “though I did not learn 
matters of accounting, I will guard the funds of the kingdom.” Soon after as 
the Katikiro, he initiated the construction of the new Twekobe (traditionally, 
the main residence of the Kabaka), the home of the Katikiro as well as homes 
of many Saza and Gombolola chiefs (which are still standing.
In those days, the Buganda treasury was renowned as the wealthiest in all 
of East Africa. While he was treasurer, he began the collection of the funds 
necessary to build the Bulange (at the time, the Bulange was in the Lubiri).
In 1929, Nsibirwa became Katikkiro. It was the highest position in Buganda 
that a commoner could achieve. The monthly salary of a katikkiro was 
1,000 shillings; he was given a pension of 333 shillings per month. Nsibirwa 
however had official land in Kalasa in Luweero from which the food to feed 
and maintain his household was gathered. From this land, he was able to 
educate his children, the children of his siblings and well as those of his 
friends.
One his most important jobs as Katikkiro was introducing heirs to the Kabaka. 
In Buganda, when a landowner died, his heir was introduced to the Kabaka.