Marriage and Home Life


Marriage and Home Life
He married Damali Nawaggi in Church in 1905 but married a few more wives 
later. 
The names of the other wives were;
1. Veronica Namudu (Jjaja Bugerere)
2. Erina Nankya (Jjaja Seeta)
3. Kasalina Naku Ntabade (Jjaja Nakulabye)
4. Maama Naome (also mother of Kosia Waggwa)
5. Maama Naome (mother of Joyce Nakalema Serunjogi) 
6. Mama Edisa Nabunya (mother of Seruwagi)
Within Butikiro (Official residence of the Katikkiro) there were several houses 
scattered over a very large “Home” area. It was the home for Martin Luther 
Nsibirwa, Mama Damali was in the main Butikiro house and the other 
Maama’s in different houses with their children. There were also houses for 
young boys, relatives of his wives and nephews whom he treated as his own 
children and educated them at Mengo Secondary School.
It was a very united family none the less as all the children grew up as one 
unit irrespective of age or mother. He loved all his children equally and gave 
all of them equal opportunity for education. This unity has been passed on from Generation to Generation. 
As a very religious man, he would lead prayers for the family in the evenings 
with his children. It was a way to have quality time with his children as his 
homestead was very huge. Although he was baptized very young, he grew 
up and became a deep believer in God and the Church. Despite having 
several wives he observed the church’s laws and would pray every morning 
at Namirembe Cathedral before he would start his duties and in the evenings 
at home.
His children would remember one day when Bishop CS Stuart after observing 
this deep devotion to God and the Church suggested to him that he should 
receive the Holy Communion. He declined and said, “Bishop my weakness 
should not violate the laws of God.” This was because he knew that 
Church strictly did not accept one with a marriage of more than one wife 
or not married in the Church to take Holy Communion. He never received 
communion until his death. 
Within his family he had basic stewards and Servants;
a) Malaki Matovu – The driver till the 5th September 1945 for about 13 
to 14 years.
b) Yakoba Nsubuga – Steward who administered all the finances in the 
home to everyone as was needed. He lived with his wife and children 
and also had his children educated at Nsibirwa’s Cost, boys at Mengo 
High School and Girls at Gayaza High School.
c) Anderea – Washing and Ironing of Nsibirwa’s Clothes. Anderea always 
wore a Kanzu, was very tidy and nice. He never had a wife yet was 
highly disciplined.
d) Leo Ssebingi – His main job was to take the children on the bicycle for 
regular injections for malaria to Mulago, Mengo or Rubaga Hospital.
e) Yosia Musisi – Driver of the Butikiro Lorry which went routinely to 
Kalasa, Bulemezi to bring Matooke for feeding the Home of Katikiro’s 
population. Residents in Kalasa had to provide the matooke once a 
week for all the Katikiro as a tax. The lorry was known as “Luwalo! 
(Complusory Tax)”- Kalasa was the official land for the Katikkiro welfare.
f) Sowedi – The Butcher of Goats and other animals.