THE LIFE OF 
MARTIN LUTHER NSIBIRWA
Martin Luther Nsibirwa was born in Kirindi in Bugerere country in 
the year 1883. His father was Kiwana, son of Munyagwa, who 
was the head of the navy for Kabaka Mukabya. Munyagwa was 
of the Nvuma Clan. His mother was Bulyaba Namusoke of the 
Mpindi Clan. 
Martin Luther Nsibirwa’s origin was Ssese from the Island of Buwe and the 
line of Banoba, the sons of Kyadondo. Kiwana after being assigned the role 
of building boats for SseKkabaka Mawanda by his father, brought him and his 
siblings to Bukweya Kirindi. Interestingly the island was home to the Luggo 
Forest where the tree from which the “DAMULA” of Katikkiro of Buganda 
was made. 
Kiwana had seven sons and three daughters, Nsibirwa being the fourth son. 
His brothers were Ibuliama Makaya, Galikuwa, Kasirye, Kiriisa, Lipiya Edaaza 
and sisters were Susana Nambwayo (Lawo), Mirika Namusisi and Erinna 
Nalunga (Buligwanga)
Martin Luther Nsibirwa had a great love of his mother and would later give 
his children Mpindi Names e.g. Glady Bulyaba, Eseza Kakoba and Semu 
Ntulume.
However, as Rhoda Kalema recounts, growing up, much of the motherly care 
didn’t come from Bulyaba but instead from one of his father’s other wives 
– A Musoga woman called Kafuko. This sowed in Martin Luther Nsibirwa agreat love of the Basoga and Kafuko in fact later took him to Namakomo. 
He was baptized in about 1895 aged 12 to 13 years in the Anglican Church. It 
was not known who gave him the name “Martin Luther”. Possibly it was his 
uncle, Mulondo or Sir Apollo Kaggwa after hearing it from the Missionaries. 
Upon Nsibirwa coming of age, his maternal uncle (koja), Temitewo Mulondo, 
who was renowned throughout Bulondoganyi, took him to the household 
of Sir Apollo Kaggwa to serve as a page as was the custom of the time. As 
pages, young men acquired livelihood, administrative, informal education 
and political skills. 
The friendship between Martin Nsibirwa and his uncle was a lifelong mutual 
one. Martin Nsibirwa was forever grateful to his uncle. He said that what he 
learned as page was the basis for everything he achieved in life. His uncle 
said that even though Nsibirwa was his nephew, he surpassed him by being 
Katikkiro. 
In the household of Sir Apollo Kaggwa, the pages learnt everything necessary 
for a civilized man: (1) to speak in an appropriate and sensible manner in 
public and (2) how to endure difficulties. Civility in manners and speech was 
of the utmost importance. They also studied the acts of past chiefs and kings. 
Nsibirwa enjoyed his time as a page and Sir Apollo Kaggwa took him on as 
a son because he was the most attentive of his pupils and also executed his 
responsibilities with vigor. Sir Apollo sent him on many tasks no matter how 
far flung (even as far as Busoga). At the wedding of Sir Apollo’s son, Nsibirwa 
was the overseer. When he saw that the waiters at the table of the elders 
had not handled things properly, he went over and sorted the matter out. He 
never dallied when he saw a task that needed doing.
Sir Apollo Kaggwa entrusted Nsibirwa with the care of his children. The older 
ones viewed Nsibirwa as an older brother; and the younger ones as their 
father. He cared for Sir Apollo Kaggwa’s descendants until the day he died.