The First years of Service

In Sir Apollo Kaggwa’s household, Nsibirwa learnt to read and write. He also 
had the opportunity to work with land surveyors and learnt their craft and 
skills which he kept for the rest of his life. His work with them also gave him 
the opportunity to familiarize himself with all of Buganda. Thereafter, when 
following the news, he would use the map to identify every place mentioned 
in the news. 
In 1915, he fought for the British in Tanganyika against the Germans. In 
the Second World War, he was a strong supporter of the British against the 
Germans. Too old to fight by then, he sent one of his sons, Siira Bugembe, 
and two of his nephews Yafesi Ssali and Labani Kiggundu, along with three 
other young men from his household to fight on the side of the British. One 
of those youths, Alikisanda Bbembe, stayed in the army until 1979. Nsibirwa 
followed World War II closely through the news. He inserted pins into a map 
as a way of tracking the progress of the war effort against the Germans. He 
contributed a portion of his salary to the upkeep of the Ugandans who went 
to fight in World War II, also known as the “Abaseveni” the seventh battalion.

Rising Leadership

Before 1920, he was assigned to be the chief for the sub-county of Mutuba 
VI in the county of Kasawo. At the time of his assignment, Mutuba VI was 
still underdeveloped. Nsibirwa worked hard to increase coffee and cotton 
production as well as to improve the production of food crops. He focused 
much of his energy on fighting widespread hunger in Mutuba VI. His efforts 
demonstrated his capacity


Though only a Gombolola chief, Nsibirwa was able to attend and hold his 
own amongst great men of the time.
In 1922, he was appointed Saza Chief of Bugerere. It was a moment of great 
personal joy for him as Bugerere was his home county. He worked hard 
to improve cash crop production (coffee and cotton) as well as food crop 
production.
In 1924, he was appointed to serve as acting Saza chief of Ssingo (the 
Mukwenda). It was a great honor for a chief of Bugerere to be seconded 
to Ssingo because Ssingo was one of the high profile counties of Buganda 
(the others were Kyaggwe, Buddu, Bulemezi and Kyadondo). In those days, 
to travel from Bugerere to Ssingo was a mark of physical ability as the journey 
lasted two days on foot.